Adding GEP 724: Refresh Route-Gateway Binding (#725)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: site-src/geps/gep-724.md

  // be extended in the future to support additional kinds of parent resources
  // such as Routes.
  //
  // +optional
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
  AttachTo []AttachRef `json:"gateways,omitempty"`
```

And the struct that references:
```go
// AttachRef identifies an API object to attach to. The only kind of target
// resource with "Core" support is Gateway. This API may be extended in the
// future to support additional kinds of parent resources such as Routes.
type AttachRef struct {
  // Group is the group of the referent.
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +kubebuilder:default=networking.x-k8s.io
  Group string `json:"group"`

  // Kind is kind of the referent.
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  Kind string `json:"kind"`

  // Name is the name of the referent.
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  Name string `json:"name"`

  // SectionName is the name of a section within the target resource. When
  // unspecified, this targets the entire resource. In the following

>   // resources, SectionName is interpreted as the following:

Reviewer: nit: I assume for custom attachment points they can choose to make this something else? If so it may be best to clarify that in the comment

Author: Yeah good point, will clarify that.

  // * Gateway: Listener Name
  // * Route: Rule Name
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +optional
  SectionName string `json:"sectionName,omitempty"`

>   // Namespace is the namespace of the referent. When unspecified, the local

Reviewer: :+1: the "same namespace" and ability to omit for cluster scoped is great

Reviewer 2: Make the text more direct:

When unspecified (empty string), this will either be:

1. local namespace of the target is a namespace scoped resource
2. no namespace (not applicable) if the target is cluster-scoped.

Author: Updated, thanks!

  // namespace is inferred unless targeting a cluster-scoped resource in which
  // case no namespace is inferred.
  //
  // Support: Extended
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +optional
  Namespace string `json:"namespace,omitempty"`
}
```

### Advantages

* Simplifies the API by providing a single way to attach Routes to Gateway.
* Assigns clear responsibilities to Gateway and Route owners.
* Consistent with pattern of direct references from Routes to all associated
  resources.
* Enables attaching Routes to arbitrary parents, such as custom Gateways, other
  Routes (to be defined), or Meshes.
* Prevents accidental exposure of Routes.
* Easy to understand which Gateways/parents a Route is attached to.
* Further simplifies path to Route inclusion.
* Follows pattern of direct reference in one direction with a broader trust
  reference in the other direction.
* Aligns with initial user feedback.

> ### Disadvantages

Reviewer 3: The easy path becomes complex since Routes are now Gateway aware.

Author: What is the easy path here? The default of a Gateway selecting all Routes in a namespace?

Reviewer 3: Yes, a route allowing any gateways to bind to itself.

Author: Although those may be simpler, I think they're poor/insecure defaults. I'd prefer to move away from them in favor of more explicit attachment.

Author: Added something in the new rationale section that covers this.

* Attaching a Route to a named listener with SectionName may be a bit confusing.
* Does not utilize existing ReferencePolicy mechanism.
* May be more difficult to understand which Routes are attached to a Gateway.

> * Adding/replacing a Gateway requires changes to Routes.

Reviewer 3: This one is a deviation from our previous conversations around the separation of routes and gateways, which is okay.
Any commentary on how to avoid this?

Author: Yeah this is one that made me a bit sad. I really liked the ability to seamlessly spin up new Gateways and target the same Routes. The initial feedback we've received from our first UXR sessions suggests that's not actually as valuable as I thought and that app owners would rather have full control on the Gateways their app is attached to.

One note here is that this proposal isn't really adding anything new, it's just taking away other ways to connect Gateways and Routes. I think it makes sense to start with the simplest form possible for v1alpha2 and as requests come in, we can always consider adding back additional concepts such as selectors. I'm just not sure that request is going to be as common as I'd originally thought.

> ### Potential Expansion

Reviewer: How does this impact possible `route -> route`?

Author: I think we'd end up with 3 options here, I'm not sure which is best:

1. 1:many Route->Routes: Nearly identical to Route->Gateway pattern described here, parent Route describes trusted namespaces per rule, child Routes use attachTo mechanism to attach to a parent.
2. 1:1 Route->Route: Require direct reference in both directions (include + attachTo would both be direct refs).
3. 1:1 Route->Route: Direct reference from parent to child, ReferencePolicy to denote trust from child ns.

I think 1 and 3 make the most sense, it really just depends on how we want the feature to be used. If we want Routes to be able to somewhat blindly delegate a path to a namespace, 1 makes more sense. If we want Routes to include a very specific Route in another namespace, 3 probably makes more sense.

Reviewer: (3) seems to make most sense to me.

Reviewer 4: We designed Contour's HTTPProxy to be more like (3), but we've *definitely* had requests for not requiring a specific Route name, which I think is more like (1).

I think that (3) requires more out-of-band coordination between parties than (1) does, which could be good or bad. I'm still inclined to err on the side of more coordination and explicit config, because blanked includes scare me a bit. But it's not a strong preference.

Author: Yeah the more I've thought about this, the more I think 3 is the best approach. That means Route->Route would work nearly identically to Route->Service, which seems reasonable to me.

# GEP-724: Refresh Route-Gateway Binding

* Issue URL: [#724](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/724)
* Status: Implementable

## TLDR

This GEP proposes changes to Route-Gateway binding that will result in Routes
attaching to Gateways with direct references. When supporting Routes in multiple
namespaces, Gateways will need to specify the namespaces they trust Routes in.
These changes will slightly simplify the Route-Gateway relationship and make way
for the future addition of Route inclusion (Routes including other Routes).

## Goals

Refactor cross-namespace Route-Gateway binding to:

* Be more consistent with [cross-namespace references from
  Routes](/geps/gep-709.md)
* Provide a clear path to enable Route inclusion (Routes including Routes).
* Simplify user experience based on initial feedback.
* Enable other kinds of Route parents in addition to Gateway, this could include:

>     * Routes (as part of Route inclusion)

Author: Agree with the risks of implementing Route inclusion this way. One distinction I should probably make more clear is that I see this as a potential advantage of the flexibility of this approach, not that this should ultimately be how we implement Route inclusion. Maybe we do need to start on a GEP for Route inclusion so we can get the final piece of this puzzle solved, even if it doesn't make it into the initial v1alpha2 release...

I think it's finding itself in an awkward place between ReferencePolicy and Route->Gateway, both patterns are very similar and could potentially apply to Route->Route, but based on what you're saying here and the comment from @howardjohn above, ReferencePolicy may make more sense for that relationship. If that's the case, we just need to be sure that this `attachTo` concept is more clearly scoped to either just Gateway, or Gateway/Mesh-like parent resources.

>     * Routes (as part of Route inclusion)

Author: I think the 1:many scenario described in a different [comment](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/725#discussion_r672455899) is really the only way parentRef could make sense to refer/attach to a parent Route. With that kind of approach, we'd mirror the Route-Gateway relationship pretty closely for Route-Route. That has some appeal in that it would allow for broader delegation of a path to a namespace and not just a specific route.

On the other hand, it would add a lot of complexity to an already complex API. The other alternative of direct refs to Routes to include with ReferencePolicy as the trust mechanism feels _much_ simpler. Maybe that means we need some kind of more specific word here to indicate "resource that exists conceptually above Routing". For 99% of use cases, I think that's just Gateway, but I do like the idea of a term that's generic enough to represent a reference to a mesh or other similar non-Gateway concept.

>     * Routes (as part of Route inclusion)

Author: One positive here is that renaming a field is technically backwards compatible, so we do have some flexibility here if we don't get the name right the first time.

>     * Routes (as part of Route inclusion)

Reviewer 4: The thing that makes Route -> Route inclusion much more complex is the semantics about how you carve up the URL/request metadata space. In HTTPProxy, we explicitly decided that the rules for assigning certain requests to a child HTTPProxy (in the Gateway API, this would be a child HTTPRoute) would become surrounding, uneditable *constraints* on that child, and that the child *did not need to know* about those constraints beforehand.

This has tradeoffs, obviously, but the key part here is that you can't design the Route -> Route reference mechanism without also designing how much the included Routes will know about where they are included.

In short, I think that what we have here is broad enough to *allow* us to experiment in either way, and we shouldn't hold this GEP up on figuring out how Route->Route inclusion works.

>     * Routes (as part of Route inclusion)

Author: Thanks for the great summary @youngnick! I think we're all leaning in the same direction of not trying to be too prescriptive about how Route inclusion could work, but instead leave this as one potential approach.  I've updated this line in the GEP to read "as part of one potential approach to Route inclusion".

larger conceptual change. Instead of Gateways selecting Routes, Routes would
directly reference the Gateways they wanted to attach to. This pattern was
already possible with the existing API, but not clearly documented.

One of the key concepts in the [cross-namespace references from Routes
GEP](/geps/gep-709.md) was that of a handshake for references that cross
namespace boundaries. A key part of that handshake was that one direction
included a direct reference, while the other direction provided a way to denote
trust for a set of Namespaces and kind of resources.

It seems to make sense to carry that same underlying principle through to the
Route - Gateway relationship. Given that each Gateway is likely to support many
Routes, it would not be practical to support direct references from Gateways to
Routes. Instead, it is simpler if Routes directly reference the Gateways they
want to attach to. Gateways can then specify the namespaces they trust Routes
to attach from.

![Routes directly reference Gateway](images/724-proposal.png)

In the following example, the lb Gateway indicates that it trusts Routes from

> the foo Namespace, and the HTTPRoute in that namespace attaches directly to the

Author: Yeah that's an aspect I'm very open to changing, but didn't really want to cover it in this GEP. If there's enough interest I can expand the scope. As I understand backwards compat, we would still be able to translate a field to a list (and/or optional value) post v1alpha2.

> the foo Namespace, and the HTTPRoute in that namespace attaches directly to the

Author: Ended up adding that to this GEP after all, agree that it is quite relevant.

Gateway.

```yaml
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: lb
  namespace: infra
spec:
  listeners:
  - name: foo
    hostname: foo.com
    port: 80
    routes:
      kind: HTTPRoute
      namespaces:
        from: Selector
        selector:
          kubernetes.io/metadata.name: foo
---
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: foo
  namespace: foo
spec:
  attachTo:
  - kind: Gateway
    namespace: infra
    name: lb
    sectionName: foo
  rules:
  - name: abc
    matches:
    - path: /bar
```

## Rationale

> #### 1. Remove Complexity While Possible

Author: Updated, thanks!

are interested in the more advanced capabilities that some form of selection may
enable, but at this point it's clear that a large portion of users value an
explicit way to attach a Route to a Gateway.

#### 6. We Need to Maintain a Handshake Between Gateways and Routes
Of course we do still need a handshake that will enable cross-namespace
references between Routes and Gateways. This proposal leaves in the core
capabilities of the v1alpha1 API for this. Gateways can specify the namespaces
they trust Routes to bind from, and Routes directly reference the Gateways they
want to attach to. This is largely similar to the ReferencePolicy model proposed
for Route->Service references, but is embedded within the Route and Gateway
resources. The alternatives below explore what this could look like with
ReferencePolicy.

## API Changes

The proposed changes here can be summarized as:

* Remove Route selector from Gateways.
* Replace the 3 options from Route -> Gateway (All, FromList, SameNamespace)
  with a reference list that supports arbitrary kinds.

### Gateway

On Gateway, the only change involves removing the Route selector field.

> Everything else remains the same.

Author: Updated, thanks!

#### Removed

```go
  // Selector specifies a set of route labels used for selecting
  // routes to associate with the Gateway. If this Selector is defined,
  // only routes matching the Selector are associated with the Gateway.
  // An empty Selector matches all routes.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +optional

>   Selector *metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector,omitempty"`

Author: At this point the idea is that they would restrict the kinds of Routes that could be attached to the Gateway, but I'm increasingly thinking they don't make sense anymore, at least not in their current form. With direct references we have clear indication of intent and an easy way to communicate via status that attachment was unsuccessful.

>   Selector *metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector,omitempty"`

Author: Updated this GEP to change them as well since that does seem highly related here.

  // route. This field is ignored for other values of "Allow".
  //
  // +optional
  GatewayRefs []GatewayReference `json:"gatewayRefs,omitempty"`
}
```

#### Added
To Route Specs:
```go
  // AttachTo defines the parent resources this Route should be attached to. The
  // only kind of target resource with "Core" support is Gateway. This API may
  // be extended in the future to support additional kinds of parent resources
  // such as Routes.
  //
  // +optional
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
  AttachTo []AttachRef `json:"gateways,omitempty"`
```

And the struct that references:
```go
// AttachRef identifies an API object to attach to. The only kind of target
// resource with "Core" support is Gateway. This API may be extended in the
// future to support additional kinds of parent resources such as Routes.
type AttachRef struct {
  // Group is the group of the referent.
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +kubebuilder:default=networking.x-k8s.io
  Group string `json:"group"`

  // Kind is kind of the referent.
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253

>   Kind string `json:"kind"`

Author: Yeah completely agree here, I came very close to adding a Gateway default as well but ultimately decided against it.

>   Kind string `json:"kind"`

Reviewer: is it backwards compatible to add a default later? Seems like it should be?

I don't have a strong preference, but suspect 99% of use cases will be `Gateway` so I could see folks liking the defaulting. Good to be able to add it later if its an issue

>   Kind string `json:"kind"`

Reviewer 3: > is it backwards compatible to add a default later?

I don't think so but I'm not sure.

I'd recommend to adding a default here, I expect a large majority would be gateway.

>   Kind string `json:"kind"`

Reviewer 4: I lean towards explicitness on this one as well. +1 to no default.

>   Kind string `json:"kind"`

Author: If I'm interpreting this correctly, the current votes for setting Gateway as default here are:

@youngnick: No
@Miciah: Leaning yes
@hbagdi: Yes
@howardjohn: Fine either way
@jpeach: Leaning no

If I've interpreted that correctly, it seems like we're effectively tied. Fortunately we can change defaults post-v1alpha2 release. Although I initially omitted a default here, I'm leaning towards adding one here since it does represent 99% of use cases. If anyone feels strongly that we should leave out a default, I'm happy to leave it off though.

>   Kind string `json:"kind"`

Reviewer 5: I can't figure out what this thread refers to any more :joy:

>   Kind string `json:"kind"`

Author: Haha this is in the context of `route.spec.parentRefs.kind` and the question is if we should default it to "Gateway". It seems like no one feels overly strongly on this one, but if anyone does I'm happy to go that way. At present, I'm leaning towards leaving it with a "Gateway" default because that represents such a large majority of use cases.

  // Name is the name of the referent.
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  Name string `json:"name"`

  // SectionName is the name of a section within the target resource. When
  // unspecified, this targets the entire resource. In the following
  // resources, SectionName is interpreted as the following:
  // * Gateway: Listener Name

>   // * Route: Rule Name

Author: Good point - added below. I think when I was initially writing this GEP they were included in GEP #713, added them here as well now.

  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +optional

>   SectionName string `json:"sectionName,omitempty"`

Author: Good question, I added some detail to the proposed spec for this.

  // Namespace is the namespace of the referent. When unspecified (empty
  // string), this will either be:
  //
  // * local namespace of the target is a namespace scoped resource
  // * no namespace (not applicable) if the target is cluster-scoped.
  //
  // Support: Extended
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +optional

>   Namespace string `json:"namespace,omitempty"`

Author: Updated, thanks!

A compelling alternative to this proposal would involve retaining the Route
selector in Gateway and replacing the trust concept in Routes with
ReferencePolicy. To represent the same example as above, we'd use a Route
selector on Gateway, a corresponding label on the HTTPRoute, and a
ReferencePolicy that allowed it:

```yaml
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: xlb
  namespace: infra
spec:
  listeners:
  - name: foo
    hostname: foo.com
    port: 80
    routes:
      kind: HTTPRoute
      selector:
        gateway: xlb
      namespaces:
        from: Selector
        selector:
          kubernetes.io/metadata.name: foo
---
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: foo
  namespace: foo
  labels:
    gateway: xlb
spec:
  rules:
  - name: abc
    matches:
    - path: /bar
---
kind: ReferencePolicy
metadata:
  name: infra-gateways
  namespace: foo
spec:
  from:
  - group: networking.gateway.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    namespace: infra
  to:
  - group: networking.gateway.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
```

#### Advantages

* Consistent use of ReferencePolicy throughout the API.
* Provides a single way of binding Gateways to Routes.

#### Disadvantages

> * Even the simplest cross-namespace reference from Gateway -> Route would

Author: This relies on the existing namespace selector in Gateway listeners to denote where Routes are trusted to bind from. Although it would be nice to reuse ReferencePolicy here, the nested list of listeners makes it significantly more complex + verbose as shown in the alternatives.

  require a ReferencePolicy in each target namespace.
* Existing demos and examples would become significantly more verbose.
* Does not suppport attaching Routes to arbitrary parents.
* Does not prevent accidental exposure of Routes.
* Route owners have limited control in terms of which Gateways their Route is
  attached to.

### 2. ReferencePolicy with Routes referencing Gateways

![ReferencePolicy with Routes referencing Gateways](images/724-alt2.png)

The other way we could use ReferencePolicy would be with Routes referencing
Gateways. Unfortunately the nested structure of Gateways makes this nearly

> impossible to do effectively. A core concept for Gateways is that each listener

Reviewer 5: My main objection to this approach is that `ReferencePolicy` is a access control object, not a binding object. Best to not mix those concerns.

Author: Agree that we have to be careful here, but in this case ReferencePolicy would effectively been allowing access/references from Routes to Gateway listeners.

should be able to attach to an entirely different set of Routes. For example,
a Gateway may want to delegate foo.com to the foo namespace and bar.com to the

> bar namespace. Unfortunately thay would be very difficult to recreate with

Author: Woops, updated, thanks!

	// the empty string indicates the networking.x-k8s.io API group.
	// For example, use the following to select an HTTPRoute:
	//
	// routes:
	//   kind: HTTPRoute
	//
	// Otherwise, if an alternative API group is desired, specify the desired
	// group:
	//
	// routes:
	//   group: acme.io
	//   kind: FooRoute
	//
	// Support: Core
	//
	// +optional
	// +kubebuilder:default=networking.x-k8s.io
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
	Group *string `json:"group,omitempty"`
	// Kind is the kind of the route resource to select.
	//
	// Kind MUST correspond to kinds of routes that are compatible with the
	// application protocol specified in the Listener's Protocol field.
	//
	// If an implementation does not support or recognize this
	// resource type, it SHOULD set the "ResolvedRefs" condition to false for
	// this listener with the "InvalidRoutesRef" reason.
	//
	// Support: Core
	Kind string `json:"kind"`
```

#### Added
```go
type ListenerRoutes struct {
  // ...
  // Kinds specifies the groups and kinds of Routes that are allowed to bind to
  // this Gateway listener. When unspecified or empty, the only limitation on

>   // the kinds of Routes supported is the Listener protocol. Kind MUST

Reviewer 3: It would be better to have an explicit list over an implied reference. The map of protocol->[]route-types-on-that-protocol will change based on the implementations and even within core as time goes on, which could lead to unnecessary exposure to other protocols.

If YAML verbosity is the reason, IMHO we should pick clarity in this case over conciseness.
Another solution would be to introduce defaulting via the webhook (need a mutating one) based on the listener protocol.

Reviewer: I disagree. Not sure I can provide any concrete reason why other than personal preference though :slightly_smiling_face:.

It seems to me there is minimal risk of accidentally selecting the wrong kind - and even if it does happen, is it so bad? I am assuming we don't add an InsecureHTTPRoute that violates a bunch of security rules in the future (or a less contrived example) where it would be bad to select extra routes.

Author: I'm not tied to either of these approaches, but do prefer the more lenient interpretation I proposed due to ease of use. With the change to direct references proposed here, the risk of routes being accidentally bound to Gateways seems very low.

If we were still doing selection, a change to the Routes supported for a given protocol could immediately result in more Routes being attached to a Gateway when Route types were not specified. On the other hand, with direct references from Routes, a Route of the new type would have to directly reference the Gateway it wanted to attach to. That seems unlikely to cause things to break in significant ways. 

I'd completely agree that we should avoid this if we were still using selection, but with this new approach, I think the only thing most Gateway admins should have to worry about is the hostname, port, and protocol of a listener + the namespaces it supports. If you need to further restrict Route kinds, that's possible, but that seems like an advanced and usually unnecessary use case.

Reviewer 3: > If we were still doing selection, a change to the Routes supported for a given protocol could immediately result in more Routes being attached to a Gateway when Route types were not specified. On the other hand, with direct references from Routes, a Route of the new type would have to directly reference the Gateway it wanted to attach to. That seems unlikely to cause things to break in significant ways.

Fair. I'm sold.

How about having defaults in here?
If I'm debugging or trying to understand how the API works, and I see '[]RouteGroupKind' as empty, how I'm supposed to know which types routes are binding to this listener since there is no concept of 'protocol' in Routes.
I could do filtering and what not but seeing the route types in there will give a clear pointer to look at those other resources.

Reviewer 4: > I'd completely agree that we should avoid this if we were still using selection, but with this new approach, I think the only thing most Gateway admins should have to worry about is the hostname, port, and protocol of a listener + the namespaces it supports. If you need to further restrict Route kinds, that's possible, but that seems like an advanced and usually unnecessary use case.

I think this is the argument that clinches this for me. As long as we mandate what controllers must do for the status of an object that attempts to attach to a listener that can't support it, I think it's okay.

However, I do think that it's important to have some status information that makes it clear to a Gateway owner that Routes have attempted to attach to a Listener that doesn't support them - we need to ensure there's a trail in both Gateway -> Route and Route -> Gateway directions for people to follow when things go wrong, because the objects have different owners.

In terms of having defaults, I think that it's important for the described behavior that this be defaulted to an empty list, but we can specify defaults in the RouteGroupKind struct. I feel like @hbagdi's concern here is about discoverability and status though?

Author: Thanks @youngnick, I think that's a good distinction. We could expand status for Gateway listeners so controllers could populate the kinds of Routes they were supporting for that listener. I've got some larger thoughts around status that will require a bigger update, so I'll work on that in a subsequent commit. @hbagdi would a status based approach work for you in terms of improving debuggability?

Author: Added a new status based approach as described above.

  // correspond to kinds of Routes that are compatible with the application
  // protocol specified in the Listener's Protocol field. If an implementation
  // does not support or recognize this resource type, it SHOULD set the
  // "ResolvedRefs" condition to false for this listener with the
  // "InvalidRoutesRef" reason.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +optional
  Kinds []RouteGroupKind `json:"kinds,omitempty"`
}

> type RouteGroupKind struct {

Reviewer 3: My preference would be to require both and then make them optional in future (not a breaking change).

> type RouteGroupKind struct {

Author: > My preference would be to require both and then make them optional in future

Agree with that. That's the current state as I understand it - even though Group is marked as "optional" that's only because there is a default value. There is no way for it to be empty.

> type RouteGroupKind struct {

Reviewer 4: This means that the way these fields are used is that if this stanza is not specified, match anything. If it is, match only this. You must specify at least a Kind, in which case the group defaults to `gateway.networking.io`. Otherwise, you may specify any Kind.

I like it.

  // Group is the group of the Route.
	//
	// Support: Core
	//
	// +optional

> 	// +kubebuilder:default=networking.gateway.k8s.io

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	// +kubebuilder:default=gateway.networking.k8s.io
```

Reviewer 3: This is in multiple places.

Author: 🤦 updated, thanks!

// field results in preventing the selection of a Route by a Gateway, an
// "Admitted" condition with a status of false must be set for the Gateway on
// that Route.
type RouteGateways struct {
  // Allow indicates which Gateways will be allowed to use this route.
  // Possible values are:
  // * All: Gateways in any namespace can use this route.
  // * FromList: Only Gateways specified in GatewayRefs may use this route.
  // * SameNamespace: Only Gateways in the same namespace may use this route.
  //
  // +optional
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=All;FromList;SameNamespace
  // +kubebuilder:default=SameNamespace
  Allow *GatewayAllowType `json:"allow,omitempty"`

  // GatewayRefs must be specified when Allow is set to "FromList". In that
  // case, only Gateways referenced in this list will be allowed to use this
  // route. This field is ignored for other values of "Allow".
  //
  // +optional
  GatewayRefs []GatewayReference `json:"gatewayRefs,omitempty"`
}
```

#### Added
To Route Specs:
```go
  // AttachTo defines the parent resources this Route should be attached to. The
  // only kind of target resource with "Core" support is Gateway. This API may

>   // be extended in the future to support additional kinds of parent resources

Reviewer 3: Clarify: It is an error to reference a Gateway resource multiple times list this list.

Author: Good call, added

>   // such as Routes.

Reviewer 3: Just want to call out (no action required): This is not the case today because RouteStatus explicitly reference Gateway.

Question: Should we rename fields in the status block as well?

Author: Good call, added a section renaming this.

  //
  // +optional
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16

>   AttachTo []AttachRef `json:"gateways,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: No action required here but a comment:
If we settle on this, we should move away from "binding" terminology and instead move to "attach/detach" terminology between Routes/Gateways.

"BindTo" would also have been fine, that would avoid rephrasing documentation.

Reviewer 3: Another note, with `ForwardTo` going away with #718, we will have only one "verbTo" field.
We have already seen how verb fields are a little challenging to document and communicate. Might be worth considering an alternative name here.
`attachments`, `from` (to match RP resource), `binders`, `attachers`, `referrer`?

Author: Good point. Any preference between the following field names?

- parentRefs
- attachRefs
- bindingRefs

I think I still slightly prefer the clarity of `attachTo` but I don't think that actually follows the [API conventions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#naming-of-the-reference-field).

/cc @bowei @howardjohn @jpeach @mark-church @youngnick

Author: Going with parentRefs for now, open to better names though.

```

And the struct that references:
```go
// AttachRef identifies an API object to attach to. The only kind of target
// resource with "Core" support is Gateway. This API may be extended in the
// future to support additional kinds of parent resources such as Routes.
type AttachRef struct {
  // Group is the group of the referent.
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +kubebuilder:default=gateway.networking.k8s.io
  Group string `json:"group"`

  // Kind is kind of the referent.
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  Kind string `json:"kind"`

  // Namespace is the namespace of the referent. When unspecified (empty
  // string), this will either be:
  //
  // * local namespace of the target is a namespace scoped resource

>   // * no namespace (not applicable) if the target is cluster-scoped.

Reviewer 3: @robscott  https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/2366#discussion_r567114299

We should avoid implicit cluster-scoped fields.

Reviewer: It feels like I am probably wrong if I am disagreeing with an API lead, but having to specify adding `scope` seems like a really bad UX. The GVK already determines if its scoped or not, feels redundant...

Author: Good catch, I really don't love the idea of a `scope` field, but it does seem to be the apimachinery preference + has prior art for Ingress now.

  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +optional
  Namespace string `json:"namespace,omitempty"`

  // Name is the name of the referent.
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  Name string `json:"name"`

  // SectionName is the name of a section within the target resource. In the
  // following resources, SectionName is interpreted as the following:
  //
  // * Gateway: Listener Name
  //
  // Implementations MAY choose to support attaching Routes to other resources.
  // If that is the case, they MUST clearly document how SectionName is
  // interpreted.
  //
  // When unspecified (empty string), this will reference the entire resource.
  // For the purpose of status, an attachment is considered successful if at
  // least one section in the parent resource accepts it. For example, Gateway
  // listeners can restrict which Routes can bind to them by Route kind,
  // namespace, or hostname. If 1 of 2 Gateway listeners accept attachment from
  // the referencing Route, the Route MUST be considered successfully
  // attached. If no Gateway listeners accept attachment from this Route, the

>   // Route MUST be considered detached from the Gateway.

Reviewer 3: Did we consider a []string for this type to support explicitly tartgetting ports? Not a requirement?

Author: I think it's always easier to go from a single value to a list than the other way around (for example Pod IP -> IPs now). My preference is to start on the simpler side and expand if/when it's needed.

  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +optional
  SectionName string `json:"sectionName,omitempty"`
}
```

This would also require adding a `Name` field to Gateway listeners and Route
rules to support the SectionName concept:

```go
type Listener struct {
    // Name is the name of the Listener. If more than one Listener is present
    // each Listener MUST specify a name. The names of Listeners MUST be unique
    // within a Gateway.
    //
    // Support: Core
    //
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
    // +optional
    Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
    // ...
}
```

```go
type RouteRule struct {
    // Name is the name of the Route rule. If more than one Route Rule is
    // present, each Rule MUST specify a name. The names of Rules MUST be unique
    // within a Route.
    //
    // Support: Core
    //
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
    // +optional

>     Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Is this assuming that we will build route inclusion using this mechanism?
If that is the only reason, please remove this field. We can add it in later once we are more sure (we don't seem to be sure right now: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/725/files#r677977878).

Does ReferencePolicy have anything to do here?

Reviewer: I think its still used to attach policy to a route, even if not Route<->Route. Ie apply TimeoutPolicy to a route

Author: Yeah this was copied verbatim from the original GEP for policy attachment where this was proposed. My rationale for adding it here was so that it could also apply to policy attachment, but I'll pull that out here because it's out of scope. It will be fairly easy to add later if necessary.

Author: Removed this, we can add it later if needed.

    hostname: foo.com
    port: 80
    routes:
      kind: HTTPRoute
      selector:
        gateway: xlb
      namespaces:
        from: Selector
        selector:
          kubernetes.io/metadata.name: foo
---
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: foo
  namespace: foo
  labels:
    gateway: xlb
spec:
  rules:
  - name: abc
    matches:
    - path: /bar
---
kind: ReferencePolicy
metadata:
  name: infra-gateways
  namespace: foo
spec:
  from:
  - group: networking.gateway.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    namespace: infra
  to:
  - group: networking.gateway.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
```

#### Advantages

* Consistent use of ReferencePolicy throughout the API.
* Provides a single way of binding Gateways to Routes.

#### Disadvantages

* Even the simplest cross-namespace reference from Gateway -> Route would
  require a ReferencePolicy in each target namespace.
* Existing demos and examples would become significantly more verbose.
* Does not suppport attaching Routes to arbitrary parents.
* Does not prevent accidental exposure of Routes.
* Route owners have limited control in terms of which Gateways their Route is
  attached to.

### 2. ReferencePolicy with Routes referencing Gateways

> ![ReferencePolicy with Routes referencing Gateways](images/724-alt2.png)

Reviewer 3: Are the images for the alternatives swapped or am I understanding these alternatives wrong?

namespaces, Gateways will need to specify the namespaces they trust Routes in.
These changes will slightly simplify the Route-Gateway relationship and make way
for the future addition of Route inclusion (Routes including other Routes).

## Goals

Refactor cross-namespace Route-Gateway binding to:

* Be more consistent with [cross-namespace references from
  Routes](/geps/gep-709.md)
* Provide a clear path to enable Route inclusion (Routes including Routes).
* Simplify user experience based on initial feedback.
* Enable other kinds of Route parents in addition to Gateway, this could include:
    * Routes (as part of Route inclusion)
    * Custom Gateway resources
    * Mesh resources

## Out of scope

* Defining how Route inclusion will work.

## Existing Approach

The existing API already supports cross-namespace references. Gateways configure
the following:

* A Route label selector
* Namespaces: Same, Selector, or All

Routes then have three options as far as which Gateways can bind to them:

* Same namespace (default)
* From a list of Gateways
* All

Although this enables a great deal of flexibility, it can lead to confusion. For

> example, 2 separate label selectors from Gateway can be challenging to compute.

Reviewer 6: What does "challenging to compute" mean?  Difficult for humans to reason about? Difficult for an implementation to compute the intersection of routes matching the route selector and routes in namespaces matching the namespace selector?

Author: That's a good question, I think my primary concern was user complexity, added some more clarification here.

they trust Routes to bind from, and Routes directly reference the Gateways they
want to attach to. This is largely similar to the ReferencePolicy model proposed
for Route->Service references, but is embedded within the Route and Gateway
resources. The alternatives below explore what this could look like with
ReferencePolicy.

## API Changes

The proposed changes here can be summarized as:

* Remove Route selector from the RouteBindingSelector in Gateway listeners.
* Replace Route kind and group with optional list of accepted kinds and groups
  in RouteBindingSelector.
* Rename RouteBindingSelector to ListenerRoutes.
* Replace the 3 options from Route -> Gateway (All, FromList, SameNamespace)
  with a reference list that supports arbitrary kinds.

### Gateway

On Gateway, the only change involves removing the Route selector field.
Everything else remains the same.

#### Removed

```go
  // Selector specifies a set of route labels used for selecting
  // routes to associate with the Gateway. If this Selector is defined,
  // only routes matching the Selector are associated with the Gateway.
  // An empty Selector matches all routes.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +optional

>   Selector *metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: This should be indented (or the lines further down should be unindented).

Author: Updated, thanks!

	// Group is the group of the route resource to select. Omitting the value or specifying

> 	// the empty string indicates the networking.x-k8s.io API group.

Author: Updated, thanks!

	// For example, use the following to select an HTTPRoute:
	//
	// routes:
	//   kind: HTTPRoute
	//
	// Otherwise, if an alternative API group is desired, specify the desired
	// group:
	//
	// routes:
	//   group: acme.io
	//   kind: FooRoute
	//
	// Support: Core
	//
	// +optional
	// +kubebuilder:default=networking.x-k8s.io
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
	Group *string `json:"group,omitempty"`
	// Kind is the kind of the route resource to select.
	//
	// Kind MUST correspond to kinds of routes that are compatible with the
	// application protocol specified in the Listener's Protocol field.
	//
	// If an implementation does not support or recognize this

> 	// resource type, it SHOULD set the "ResolvedRefs" condition to false for

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
	// resource type, it SHOULD set the "ResolvedRefs" condition to "False" for
```

Author: Good catch, thanks! I'm leaving this as is though because it denotes code that we're removing.

	// this listener with the "InvalidRoutesRef" reason.
	//
	// Support: Core
	Kind string `json:"kind"`
```

#### Added
```go
type ListenerRoutes struct {
  // ...
  // Kinds specifies the groups and kinds of Routes that are allowed to bind to
  // this Gateway listener. When unspecified or empty, the only limitation on
  // the kinds of Routes supported is the Listener protocol. Kind MUST
  // correspond to kinds of Routes that are compatible with the application
  // protocol specified in the Listener's Protocol field. If an implementation
  // does not support or recognize this resource type, it SHOULD set the
  // "ResolvedRefs" condition to false for this listener with the
  // "InvalidRoutesRef" reason.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +optional

>   Kinds []RouteGroupKind `json:"kinds,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Unbounded list. Can be taken care of in the implementation directly.

Author: Updated, thanks!

  Gateways *RouteGateways `json:"gateways,omitempty"`
```

And the structs that references:
```go
// RouteGateways defines which Gateways will be able to use a route. If this
// field results in preventing the selection of a Route by a Gateway, an
// "Admitted" condition with a status of false must be set for the Gateway on
// that Route.
type RouteGateways struct {
  // Allow indicates which Gateways will be allowed to use this route.
  // Possible values are:
  // * All: Gateways in any namespace can use this route.
  // * FromList: Only Gateways specified in GatewayRefs may use this route.
  // * SameNamespace: Only Gateways in the same namespace may use this route.
  //
  // +optional
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=All;FromList;SameNamespace
  // +kubebuilder:default=SameNamespace
  Allow *GatewayAllowType `json:"allow,omitempty"`

  // GatewayRefs must be specified when Allow is set to "FromList". In that
  // case, only Gateways referenced in this list will be allowed to use this
  // route. This field is ignored for other values of "Allow".
  //
  // +optional
  GatewayRefs []GatewayReference `json:"gatewayRefs,omitempty"`
}
```

#### Added
To Route Specs:
```go

>   // ParentRefs references the parent resources this Route should be attached

Reviewer 3: should is lenient and doesn't get the point across.
We want to communicate "anyone can attach to this route ONLY IF they are in this list".
Something along the lines:
```suggestion
  // ParentRefs references the resources that can process/attach/use this Route.
```

Reviewer 4: yeah, agreed, although I would nit that it should be `attach to`. :)

Author: Do we think "can attach to" is sufficient here? Not exactly sure how to phrase this, but I think the behavior we want is for these referenced resources to be attached as long as they allow it. Exceptions to that would include conflicts or being referenced from a namespace or kind that isn't allowed. I think we need to be clear that this expresses a desire to attach to the given resource, not just permission for a resource to be attached.

  // to. The only kind of parent resource with "Core" support is Gateway. This
  // API may be extended in the future to support additional kinds of parent

>   // resources such as Routes. It is invalid to reference the same parent

Reviewer 6: There's no "Route" kind, so it would be clearer to use a specific example:
```suggestion
  // resources, such as HTTPRoute. It is invalid to reference the same parent
```
or use more general language:
```suggestion
  // resources, such as one of the route kinds. It is invalid to reference the same parent
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

>   // resource more than once.

Author: That seems reasonable, I can add something to clarify that.

>   // resource more than once.

Author: Added some clarification, let me know what you think.

>   // resource more than once.

Reviewer 6: Sorry, I should have been more clear.  My question was about this statement in particular: "It is invalid to reference the same parent resource more than once."  If the implementation does merge two listeners, and one route is attached to both listeners, should that be treated as the route's referencing the same parent resource more than once and thus be considered invalid?

>   // resource more than once.

Author: Oh wow, not sure how I missed that. The spec I had here was very unclear. I've added some clarification that it should be valid to attach a Route to multiple sections/listeners within a Parent/Gateway.

  //
  // +optional

>   // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16

Author: Just trying to avoid unbounded lists. Hard to think of any use case where this value would be more than 3 or 4. I guess it's possible that a single Route could be used to redirect to HTTPS, and that could get reused frequently. Did you have a use case for >16?

>   // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16

Reviewer 6: I'm thinking of route-to-route.  Maybe I want to add the same microservice to many different applications.  I don't have a concrete use-case though, so I don't feel too strongly about this.

>   // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16

Author: Yeah I think it's unlikely that we'll use this mechanism for attaching to a Route, but since we don't have a GEP for that yet, we can't know for sure. At least with values like this, we can always increase the number of items allowed, nearly impossible to decrease in the future.

  ParentRefs []ParentRef `json:"parentRefs,omitempty"`
```

And the struct that references:
```go
// ParentRef identifies an API object that should be considered a parent of this
// resource. The only kind of parent resource with "Core" support is Gateway.
// This API may be extended in the future to support additional kinds of parent
// resources such as Routes.
type ParentRef struct {
  // Group is the group of the referent.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +kubebuilder:default=gateway.networking.k8s.io
  Group string `json:"group"`

  // Kind is kind of the referent.
  //
  // Support: Core (Gateway)
  // Support: Extended (Other Resources)
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253

>   // +kubebuilder:default=Gateway

Reviewer 3: optional and pointer; can be taken care of in the implementation PR

Author: Updated, thanks!

  Kind string `json:"kind"`

  // Namespace is the namespace of the referent. When unspecified (empty
  // string), this will either be:
  //
  // * local namespace of the target is a namespace scoped resource
  // * no namespace (not applicable) if the target is cluster-scoped.
  //
  // Support: Extended
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +optional

>   Namespace string `json:"namespace,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: I think you need to use `MinLength=0` or a pointer type for this to be optional.

Author: Updated, thanks!

  // Scope represents if this refers to a cluster or namespace scoped resource.
  // This may be set to "Cluster" or "Namespace".
  //
  // Support: Core (Namespace)
  // Support: Extended (Cluster)
  //
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Cluster;Namespace
  // +kubebuilder:default=Namespace
  // +optional

>   Scope string `json:"scope,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: I think you need to add `"";` to the enum or make this a pointer type for it to be optional.

Reviewer 4: Could be left for the implementation, but yes, I agree that this should probably be a pointer, and have the omitted behavior defined to be the same as setting to "Namespace".

Author: Updated, thanks!

  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  Name string `json:"name"`

  // SectionName is the name of a section within the target resource. In the
  // following resources, SectionName is interpreted as the following:
  //
  // * Gateway: Listener Name
  //
  // Implementations MAY choose to support attaching Routes to other resources.
  // If that is the case, they MUST clearly document how SectionName is
  // interpreted.
  //
  // When unspecified (empty string), this will reference the entire resource.
  // For the purpose of status, an attachment is considered successful if at
  // least one section in the parent resource accepts it. For example, Gateway
  // listeners can restrict which Routes can bind to them by Route kind,
  // namespace, or hostname. If 1 of 2 Gateway listeners accept attachment from
  // the referencing Route, the Route MUST be considered successfully
  // attached. If no Gateway listeners accept attachment from this Route, the
  // Route MUST be considered detached from the Gateway.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  // +optional

>   SectionName string `json:"sectionName,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: `MinLength=0` or pointer type. 

I suggested on a call that we could use `ObjectFieldSelector` or similar to specify the section, but I neglected to comment on the PR earlier.  Would it make sense to use `ObjectFieldSelector` so the API is explicit about which section this references?

Author: Will update to a pointer, thanks!

As far as ObjectFieldSelector ([ref for anyone curious](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.22/#objectfieldselector-v1-core)), I'm not sure it's quite what we're looking for here. As I understand it, it allows us to select a single field within a resource. That would allow for the valid `spec.listeners[1]`, but lots of invalid values as well (someone may select some other part of a Gateway that may not make any sense). 

Even the valid example of `spec.listeners[1]` has issues in that it would be tied to an index and not a name. That would require Gateway admins to maintain a very specific ordering of their listeners. If that order ever switched, lots of things could break. A similar argument could be made for changing a listener name, but that seems both more manageable and expected.

If I'm understanding the [relevant API conventions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#selecting-fields) correctly, this field should be interpreted with standard JavaScript syntax, so I don't think we'd even get the flexibility of jsonpath here.

Reviewer 6: What I had in mind was that `ParentRef` would have a field like `SectionFieldRef corev1.ObjectFieldSelector` in addition to the `SectionName string` field,  and the user would specify `sectionFieldRef: spec.listeners` along with `sectionName`.  The API could require that the field identified by `sectionFieldRef` be a `+listType=map`, and then `sectionName` would specify the value to match against the field identified by `+listMapKey`: 
```go
type GatewaySpec struct {
	// ...
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name
	Listeners []Listener `json:"listeners"`

	// ...
}
type ParentRef struct {
	// ...

	// SectionFieldRef specifies a field containing sections within the
	// referent.  The specified field must be listType=map.  If
	// SectionFieldRef is specified, then SectionName must be specified as
	// well, and the value of SectionName will be used to identify the
	// specific section by matching it against the field specified by
	// listTypeMap.
	//
	// Support: Core
	//
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
	// +optional
	SectionFieldRef corev1.ObjectFieldSelector `json:"sectionFieldRef,omitempty"`

	// SectionName is ...
	SectionName string `json:"sectionName,omitempty"`

	// ...
}
```
Example:
```yaml
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  namespace: infra
  name: lb
spec:
  listeners:
  - name: foo
    # ...
---
kind: HTTPRoute
# ...
spec:
  attachTo:
  - kind: Gateway
    namespace: infra
    name: lb
    sectionFieldRef.fieldPath: spec.listeners
    sectionName: foo
```

Reviewer 6: `ObjectFieldSelector` might not be the best type (maybe it would be better to define a new  type that includes the field path and the item name), but the idea is to make explicit what `SectionName` is identifying.

Author: Thanks for the explanation @Miciah! That does make a lot more sense. I can see that being a natural extension point if/when we want to support attaching to other arbitrary fields in Gateway or elsewhere. If I'm understanding correctly, it looks like it would be easy to add as a new optional field in the future without any kind of breaking changes.

}
```

This would also require adding a `Name` field to Gateway listeners and Route
rules to support the SectionName concept:

```go
type Listener struct {
    // Name is the name of the Listener. If more than one Listener is present
    // each Listener MUST specify a name. The names of Listeners MUST be unique

>     // within a Gateway.

Reviewer 6: We should also specify `+listType=map` with `+listMapKey=name`.

Author: Updated, thanks!

    //
    // Support: Core
    //
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
    // +optional
    Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
    // ...
}
```

#### Changed

To accomodate Routes with arbitrary types of parents, `RouteGatewayStatus` would
be renamed to `RouteParentStatus`. Similarly, the `GatewayRef` inside that

> struct would be

Reviewer 6: The sentence is unterminated and the thought incomplete.

Author: 🤦 woops! Should be updated now.

  attached to.

### 2. ReferencePolicy with Routes referencing Gateways

![ReferencePolicy with Routes referencing Gateways](images/724-alt2.png)

The other way we could use ReferencePolicy would be with Routes referencing
Gateways. Unfortunately the nested structure of Gateways makes this nearly
impossible to do effectively. A core concept for Gateways is that each listener
should be able to attach to an entirely different set of Routes. For example,
a Gateway may want to delegate foo.com to the foo namespace and bar.com to the
bar namespace. Unfortunately that would be very difficult to recreate with
ReferencePolicy.

ReferencePolicy is fundamentally about trusting references from resource of kind
Foo in to resources of kind Bar. Names and section names are intentionally
excluded. If we added both of those concepts to ReferencePolicy, this would be
possible, but quite complex and verbose. This is what the example from above
would look like with this approach:

```yaml
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: lb
  namespace: infra
spec:
  listeners:
  - name: foo
    hostname: foo.com
    port: 80
---
kind: ReferencePolicy
metadata:
  name: foo-lb
  namespace: infra
spec:

>   from:
>   - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
>     kind: Gateway

Reviewer 6: Shouldn't `from:` specify HTTPRoute, and possibly a namespace?
```suggestion
  from:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
    namespace: foo
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

  to:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    name: lb
    sectionName: foo
---
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: foo
  namespace: foo
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - kind: Gateway
    namespace: infra
    name: lb
    sectionName: foo
  rules:
  - name: abc
    matches:
    - path: /bar
```

#### Advantages

* Consistent use of ReferencePolicy throughout the API.
* Provides a single way of binding Gateways to Routes.
* Supports attaching Routes to arbitrary parents.
* Prevents accidental exposure of Routes.

#### Disadvantages

* In most cases, each listener in a Gateway would require a unique
  ReferencePolicy resource.
* Even the simplest cross-namespace reference from Route -> Gateway would

>   require a ReferencePolicy in each target namespace.

Reviewer 6: Maybe worth calling out explicitly that this point would rule out self-service use-cases (if I understand correctly).  Most likely, I, as an application developer, do not have permission to create a ReferencePolicy in the infra namespace.

Author: Added, thanks!

  //
  // +optional
  Selector *metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector,omitempty"`
  // Group is the group of the route resource to select. Omitting the value or specifying
  // the empty string indicates the gateway.networking.k8s.io API group.
  // For example, use the following to select an HTTPRoute:
  //
  // routes:
  //   kind: HTTPRoute
  //
  // Otherwise, if an alternative API group is desired, specify the desired
  // group:
  //
  // routes:
  //   group: acme.io
  //   kind: FooRoute
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +optional
  // +kubebuilder:default=gateway.networking.k8s.io
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  Group *string `json:"group,omitempty"`
  // Kind is the kind of the route resource to select.
  //
  // Kind MUST correspond to kinds of routes that are compatible with the
  // application protocol specified in the Listener's Protocol field.
  //
  // If an implementation does not support or recognize this
  // resource type, it SHOULD set the "ResolvedRefs" condition to false for
  // this listener with the "InvalidRoutesRef" reason.
  //
  // Support: Core
  Kind string `json:"kind"`
```

#### Added
```go

> type ListenerRoutes struct {

Reviewer 5: Nit: this would be set on the listener `Routes` field, which implies the following addition:

```Go
type Listener struct {
...
Routes ListenerRoutes
}
```

Or is this being added to new fields in `RouteSelector`?

Author: Yeah this was confusing, I added some text for this + a related change to describe where they would fit in.

```go
type ListenerRoutes struct {
  // ...
  // Kinds specifies the groups and kinds of Routes that are allowed to bind to
  // this Gateway listener. When unspecified or empty, the only limitation on
  // the kinds of Routes supported is the Listener protocol. Kind MUST
  // correspond to kinds of Routes that are compatible with the application
  // protocol specified in the Listener's Protocol field. If an implementation
  // does not support or recognize this resource type, it SHOULD set the
  // "ResolvedRefs" condition to false for this listener with the
  // "InvalidRoutesRef" reason.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +optional
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10
  Kinds []RouteGroupKind `json:"kinds,omitempty"`
}

type RouteGroupKind struct {
  // Group is the group of the Route.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +optional
  // +kubebuilder:default=gateway.networking.k8s.io
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  Group *string `json:"group,omitempty"`
  // Kind is the kind of the Route.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=253
  Kind string `json:"kind"`
}
```

> ### Gateway Status

Author: @jpeach @youngnick @hbagdi I've added a new status section to describe suggested additions to status. I think this is relevant to different comments from all of you throughout the review of this GEP, so wanted to get your feedback on this addition if you have time.

Reviewer 4: This is great, love it.
